Indian Henry's from Kautz Creek
strenuous
12.2 4120 5650
2019

[Trail.jpg] Along the Kautz Creek trail
[ApproachingIndianHenrys.jpg] Approaching Indian Henry's along the Kautz Creek trail
[SunsetAmphitheater.jpg] Looking up at Rainier's Sunset Amphitheater
[MirrorLake.jpg] Mirror Lake

This trail is slightly shorter but steeper than the alternative 
[IndianHenrysFromLongmire] route to the alpine meadow known as Indian 
Henry's Hunting Grounds. The numbers shown above include the optional 
extension to Mirror Lakes: it's 10.5 miles if you skip that part.

The trail starts with a deceptively flat first mile through forest that is 
still regrowing after a 1947 mudflow, then takes off uphill as the trees 
increase in size and age. Compared to the route from Longmire this delivers 
views earlier on in the hike, first south to Adams and then a series of 
Rainier peek-a-boos. If you're anything like me, more than once when the 
trail arrives at a meadow and angles gently downhill you will think "cracked 
it, this must be the Hunting Grounds now". But no: it does this several 
times only to head sharply back uphill before you've even managed to catch 
your breath.

I recommend including the extra couple of miles going on to Mirror Lakes. 
This side trail is less well maintained, with several broken (yet safely 
passable) walkways over marshy spots. When you reach the 'End of Maintained 
Trail' sign shortly before the second lake, continue straight forward 
another 200 feet (not following the path to the right). At first it doesn't 
look like there's a path here, but you will soon find yourself on the start 
of the climbers trail to the Success Cleaver. There's no need to go far 
along this, as it almost immediately delivers stunning views down onto the 
Tahoma Glacier.
