Wonderland Trail
strenuous 7-12 days
93 27,000 27,000
Longmire
Pyramid Creek, Devils Dream, South Puyallup River, Klapatche Park, North Puyallup River, Golden Lakes, South Mowich River, Mowich Lake, Ipsut Creek, Eagles Roost, Cataract Valley, Carbon River Camp, Dick Creek, Mystic Camp, Granite Creek, Sunrise Camp, White River, Summerland, Indian Bar, Nickel Creek, Maple Creek, Paradise River
not yet!

<i>Note: the Wonderland is unique among the entries on this website because I haven't 
actually hiked the whole thing yet. As of this writing I've day- and section-hiked 
approximately 2/3 of the trail, and I'm researching in preparation to apply for a full 
loop permit next year, so I decided to go ahead and start writing things down as I'm 
learning them.</i>


<p class="heading">What</p>

The Wonderland Trail is a 93 mile loop circumnavigating Mount Rainier. Along the way it 
takes in many of the best examples of every kind of terrain the mountain has to offer, 
with plenty of steep ascents and descents as the trail repeatedly climbs out of a river 
valley, crests a ridge with stunning views in every direction, then plummets back down 
into the next valley.

Most people take between 7 and 12 days to complete the circuit. The Park Service allows a 
maximum of 14 days for a reservation, while some exceptional fastpacking athletes do it 
in as little as 3 days. Or if you really want to have your mind blown, do a web search 
for 'rainier infinity loop'.

Many sections of the Wonderland also make fantastic day hikes:
<ul class="tight">
  <li>[PanhandleGap]</li>
  <li>[IndianBar]</li>
  <li>[IndianHenrysFromLongmire]</li>
  <li>[SprayPark]</li>
  <li>[LongmireToReflectionLakes]</li>
  <li>[WhiteRiverToSunrise]</li>
</ul>
or shorter backpacking trips:
<ul class="tight">
  <li>[SprayParkLoop]</li>
  <li>[NorthernLoop]</li>
  <li>[KlapatchePark]</li>
  <li>[NorthPuyallup]</li>
  <li>[CarbonGlacier]</li>
</ul>


<p class="heading">How</p>

You can't just camp wherever you like on Mount Rainier. There are designated campsites, 
with pit toilets and bear poles for hanging your food. Each camp contains a number of 
individual sites designed for parties of 1 to 5 people, which can comfortably fit a 
couple of 2-person tents. Most camps also have a larger group site that can accommodate 
up to 12 people. You need a reservation for every camp you want to stay at, but the 
allocation of individual sites within a camp is first-come-first-served. The group site, 
on the other hand, must be specifically reserved in advance.

The permit application process can vary from year to year, so check
<a href="https://www.nps.gov/mora/planyourvisit/wilderness-permit.htm">https://www.nps.gov/mora/planyourvisit/wilderness-permit.htm</a>
for the latest information.

If you don't fancy the idea of carrying all the supplies for your entire trip, you can 
cache food and fuel at Longmire, Mowich Lake, Sunrise, and White River. Caches must be 
stored in rodent-proof plastic containers (a 5 gallon plastic bucket is perfect). Food 
caches can be mailed or delivered by hand, while fuel caches must be hand-delivered. See
<a href="https://www.nps.gov/mora/planyourvisit/caching-food-and-fuel.htm">https://www.nps.gov/mora/planyourvisit/caching-food-and-fuel.htm</a>
for details.

Sunrise and White River are close enough together that it doesn't make sense to cache at 
both. Use White River if you are going clockwise, or Sunrise if counterclockwise, to 
avoid having to lug a freshly refilled pack up or down the steep trail between the two.

There are occasional stories of food being stolen from caches at Mowich Lake. This is 
very rare, but has happened more than zero times. Cache locations also have a donation 
bin where people can leave unwanted supplies, so I hope the backpackers who had their 
food taken were able to find enough replacements to keep going! And to whoever was so low 
as to steal from others in the wilderness: I pray to Our Lady The Mountain that you may 
be eaten by a bear forthwith :-)

Speaking of which: bears are common on Rainier, so it's important to properly hang all 
your food and other scented supplies. Thanks to bear poles at every camp, bear canisters 
are not needed during the main hiking season, but the poles are taken down during the 
off-season.


<p class="heading">When</p>

The Wonderland Trail is most commonly hiked during the months of July, August, and 
September:

<ul>
  <li>
    July marks the transition from winter conditions to great hiking, but the melt date 
    varies greatly from year to year. Risks include deep snow at higher elevations, 
    consequently difficult route finding, and raging rivers where missing bridges may not 
    yet have been replaced. If you make reservations for early July, be prepared either 
    with the skills for safe snow travel, or to cancel at the last minute if the mountain 
    does not melt according to your schedule that year.
  </li>
  <li>
    August is the most popular month, and for good reason. Best weather. Best 
    wildflowers. Probably still some snow on the high passes, but most of the trail will 
    have melted. Most people. Most mosquitoes.
  </li>
  <li>
    September offers fall foliage colors, fewer bugs, and highest probability of the 
    whole trail being in good condition, but also cooler nights and some risk of early 
    fall snow.
  </li>
</ul>

Some people do complete the trail in June or October (or even beyond!) but these months 
greatly increase the odds of encountering winter conditions or dangerous river crossings.


<p class="heading">Where</p>

First question is where to start? There are multiple trailheads around the Wonderland:

<ul>
  <li>
    Longmire (southwest side of the mountain) is the most popular. It's easily accessible 
    year-round, has copious parking, toilets with running water, a restaurant, and a 
    small shop in case you forgot your toothbrush. There's also a historic lodge here, so 
    you could stay the night before or after your hike.
  </li>
  <li>
    Sunrise (northeast side) is in many ways similar to Longmire, with plentiful parking, 
    running water, cafe, and a small shop, but it has no lodge and is at higher elevation 
    so the access road may close during early or late season snowfalls. Note that the 
    Sunrise trailhead is 0.5 miles from the Wonderland Trail proper, and 1.3 miles from 
    Sunrise Camp.
  </li>
  <li>
    White River is near Sunrise but at lower elevation, so it remains accessible when the 
    road to Sunrise is closed. There is running water here, but no other amenities.
  </li>
  <li>
    Mowich Lake (northwest side) has only pit toilets, and lies at the end of a long, 
    dusty, potholed road. It may be closed due to snow early or late in the season.
  </li>
  <li>
    Box Canyon (southeast side) has plenty of parking space and toilets.
  </li>
  <li>
    Fryingpan Creek and Reflection Lakes are theoretically valid options, but not 
    particularly desirable due to limited parking and lack of amenities.
  </li>
  <li>
    The Paul Peak and Carbon River trailheads are not on the Wonderland Trail at all, but 
    can be useful access points when Mowich Lake is closed due to snow. Or bailout points 
    if your trip goes poorly :-(
  </li>
</ul>

Whichever of Longmire or Sunrise you don't start at, the cafe there may offer a pleasant 
mid-trip lunch break. Just be aware that stopping for a burger at Sunrise adds an extra 
mile.

Next up, which direction to hike? Personally I don't think this matters much, as (being a 
loop) either direction involves the exact same amount of up and down, plus the same views 
as long as you remember to turn around occasionally. Minor factors to consider are:

<ul>
  <li>
    Going clockwise makes it easier to carry water from St. Andrews Lake if you are 
    staying at Klapatche Park, which often dries up later in the season.
  </li>
  <li>
    The sketchy washed-out section of trail along Stevens Canyon is easier to traverse 
    going clockwise.
  </li>
  <li>
    Counterclockwise has the advantage that, because clockwise is the more popular 
    direction, when going the opposite way you're likely to encounter a wider variety of 
    new temporary friends along the trail, and thus get better what's-coming-up-next 
    intel.
  </li>
</ul>

Yet another choice: at the northwest corner of the mountain, follow the official 
Wonderland Trail over Ipsut Pass, or take the popular alternative route over Spray Park?

<ul>
  <li>
    The Ipsut Pass route is more sheltered in bad weather, and features stunning 
    old growth temperate rainforest plus the devastation of the glacial Carbon River 
    valley. It requires crossing that river on a log bridge that has an unfortunate habit 
    of getting washed away.
  </li>
  <li>
    The Spray Park route is slightly shorter but with more elevation change, and features 
    some of the best alpine wildflower meadows on the mountain. The highest part remains 
    snow covered for much of the year, and can be tricky to navigate in bad weather.
  </li>
</ul>

Both options are great, so clearly the best solution is to pick one at random for your 
Wonderland circuit, then come back later and hike the [SprayParkLoop] to also see the 
other.


<p class="heading">Campsites</p>

There are many choices while planning a Wonderland circuit. This website includes a 
<a href="../Planner.html">Wonderland Itinerary Planner</a>, which shows distance and 
elevation change between your choice of trailheads and campsites.

Going clockwise from Longmire, campsites along the Wonderland trail are:

<table class="campstable">
  <tr>
    <th/>
    <th>Individual Sites</th>
    <th>Group Site</th>
    <th>Elevation</th>
    <th>Notes</th>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Pyramid Creek</td>
    <td>3</td>
    <td>no</td>
    <td>3800'</td>
    <td></td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Devil's Dream</td>
    <td>7</td>
    <td>yes</td>
    <td>5100'</td>
    <td>Notoriously buggy during summer</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>South Puyallup River</td>
    <td>4</td>
    <td>yes</td>
    <td>4000'</td>
    <td></td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Klapatche Park</td>
    <td>4</td>
    <td>no</td>
    <td>5500'</td>
    <td>
      Water source is Aurora Lake, which tends to dry up later in the season. Carry water 
      from St. Andrews Lake (if you're heading north) or uphill from North Puyallup River 
      (if heading south)
    </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>North Puyallup River</td>
    <td>3</td>
    <td>yes</td>
    <td>3700'</td>
    <td>
      Unique and romantically spooky group site is made from the end of an abandoned road
    </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Golden Lakes</td>
    <td>5</td>
    <td>yes</td>
    <td>5100'</td>
    <td></td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>South Mowich River</td>
    <td>3</td>
    <td>yes</td>
    <td>2600'</td>
    <td></td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Mowich Lake</td>
    <td>10</td>
    <td>yes</td>
    <td>4900'</td>
    <td>
      Doubles as a popular frontcountry car camping site, so lacks privacy and is often 
      noisy
    </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Ipsut Creek</td>
    <td>12</td>
    <td>yes</td>
    <td>2400'</td>
    <td>
      <i>(if not going over Spray Park)</i>
      Former car campsite, now reclaimed as wilderness due to road closure
    </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Eagle's Roost</td>
    <td>7</td>
    <td>no</td>
    <td>4900'</td>
    <td><i>(if taking Spray Park)</i></td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Cataract Valley</td>
    <td>6</td>
    <td>yes</td>
    <td>4600'</td>
    <td><i>(if taking Spray Park)</i></td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Carbon River Camp</td>
    <td>4</td>
    <td>yes</td>
    <td>3200'</td>
    <td></td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Dick Creek</td>
    <td>2</td>
    <td>no</td>
    <td>4200'</td>
    <td></td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Mystic Camp</td>
    <td>7</td>
    <td>yes</td>
    <td>5600'</td>
    <td>
      Mystic Lake (a short walk from the camp) is where I want my ashes scattered when my 
      time comes (I suppose I should get to work on becoming close friends with some 
      strong hikers a few decades younger than me, then? :-)
    </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Granite Creek</td>
    <td>3</td>
    <td>yes</td>
    <td>5800'</td>
    <td></td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Sunrise Camp</td>
    <td>8</td>
    <td>yes</td>
    <td>6200'</td>
    <td></td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>White River</td>
    <td>4</td>
    <td>yes</td>
    <td>4200'</td>
    <td>
      This doubles as a frontcountry car camping site, but is situated in thick forest so 
      has more quiet & privacy than Mowich Lake
    </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Summerland</td>
    <td>5</td>
    <td>yes</td>
    <td>5900'</td>
    <td>Stunning alpine meadows, famous for bear encounters</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Indian Bar</td>
    <td>4</td>
    <td>yes</td>
    <td>5100'</td>
    <td>One of the prettiest places on the mountain</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Nickel Creek</td>
    <td>3</td>
    <td>yes</td>
    <td>3400'</td>
    <td></td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Maple Creek</td>
    <td>4</td>
    <td>yes</td>
    <td>2800'</td>
    <td></td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Paradise River</td>
    <td>3</td>
    <td>yes</td>
    <td>3800'</td>
    <td></td>
  </tr>
</table>

Longmire itself has nowhere to camp, but you could book a room in its lodge, or camp at 
Cougar Rock (a frontcountry car campground) 1.5 miles up the road.

Oftentimes, the secret of success for getting a Wonderland permit is flexibility. The 
more you're able to adjust dates, direction, duration, and campsites, the better your 
odds of something being available. Sometimes this can involve putting together creative 
routes that stray off the Wonderland in places, making use of whatever campsites are 
still available. There are many such possibilities, including:

<table class="campstable">
  <tr>
    <th/>
    <th>Individual Sites</th>
    <th>Group Site</th>
    <th>Elevation</th>
    <th>Notes</th>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Berkeley Park</td>
    <td>2</td>
    <td>yes</td>
    <td>5400'</td>
    <td>1.5 miles off the Wonderland, between Granite Creek and Frozen Lake</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Forest Lake</td>
    <td>yes</td>
    <td>no</td>
    <td>5700'</td>
    <td>1.8 miles off the Wonderland, between Frozen Lake and Sunrise</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Glacier Basin</td>
    <td>5</td>
    <td>yes</td>
    <td>6000'</td>
    <td>
      4.2 miles from Frozen Lake and 3.6 from White River, which may seem a lot but it 
      only adds 3.3 miles total distance if you substitute this in place of going past 
      Sunrise (and it's a much nicer place than White River to camp...)
    </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Olallie Creek</td>
    <td>2</td>
    <td>yes</td>
    <td>3900'</td>
    <td>1.2 miles off the Wonderland, between Indian Bar and Nickel Creek</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Snow Lake</td>
    <td>2</td>
    <td>no</td>
    <td>4700'</td>
    <td>
      1.5 miles off the Wonderland (including 0.4 miles of road), between Maple Creek and 
      Reflection Lakes
    </td>
  </tr>
</table>


<p class="heading">Hazards</p>

By far the greatest danger along the Wonderland Trail is the many glacial river 
crossings. Some rivers have sturdy wooden bridges over them while others are spanned by 
cool suspension bridges, but many have just a log, plus a railing if you are lucky. 
Falling off these logs into fast moving turbid waters, which are often filled with 
rolling boulders, is not good for your life expectancy. Also, these rivers have a habit 
of repeatedly removing their log crossings, so the Park Service is playing a perpetual 
game of whack-a-mole trying to keep the bridges in place.

River conditions can vary day to day and even hour to hour as melt levels change 
(mornings are better for crossing). It's a good idea to research bridge status before you 
set out, but be aware that a log which existed when you started your hike may have washed 
away by the time you arrive at its river, or a missing bridge may have been replaced. 
Judge for yourself, and turn back if you don't like what you see.

Potentially problematic river crossings are:

<ul>
  <li>
    Kautz Creek (between Longmire and Pyramid Creek Camp) was barely a trickle each time 
    I've crossed it so far, but I'm told the level can increase significantly during 
    heavy rain.
  </li>
  <li>
    Pyramid Creek (between Pyramid Creek Camp and Devil's Dream) is a substantial river 
    crossed by log bridge with railing.
  </li>
  <li>
    South Mowich River (by South Mowich Camp, between Golden Lakes and Mowich Lake) has 
    multiple forks that frequently change their course. Sometimes there are log bridges 
    over them, or there may be fallen trees you can cross on. This is probably the most 
    dangerous and unpredictable of the rivers, combining remote location with lack of 
    alternatives if you can't find a good way across it.
  </li>
  <li>
    The lower Carbon River crossing (between Ipsut Creek and Carbon River Camp) is 
    another log-with-railing, which happens to be washed out at the time I'm writing 
    this. This would be a risky river to attempt fording if there is no bridge in place 
    when you arrive there. An alternative is to take the Spray Park route instead of 
    going via Ipsut Pass and Ipsut Creek, which avoids this log bridge location and 
    allows you to cross the Carbon River on a nice suspension bridge instead.
  </li>
  <li>
    Winthrop Creek (between Mystic Lake and Granite Creek) was the site of a fatality in 
    2018, at which time its log bridge had no railing. A railing had been added by the 
    time I crossed here in 2020, but water was lapping over the top of the log at peak 
    melt times.
  </li>
  <li>
    White River (leaving White River campground heading toward Fryingpan Creek) is 
    another log-with-railing that's washed out at the time of this writing. If you can't 
    cross safely here, detour down the road and hop back onto the Wonderland shortly 
    after crossing the road bridge.
  </li>
</ul>

In addition to the rivers, snow can of course be a hazard especially early in the season. 
The highest points along the Wonderland are Panhandle Gap (between Summerland and Indian 
Bar) and Spray Park (if you choose to go that way). These often remain snowy until the 
end of August, and there's a steep traverse approaching Panhandle Gap from the north that 
would be un-fun to slide down. Spikes aren't needed once most of the trail has melted, 
but it'll be easier to cross these high places if you can arrange to do so later in the 
day, when the snow is soft rather than icy. And make sure your navigation is solid for 
these sections! Most of the Wonderland Trail is obvious to follow, but Panhandle Gap and 
the top of Spray Park are just rocks and snow patches with cairns to mark the way, so 
it'd be easy to lose your way during bad weather.

One final hazard lies along Stevens Canyon, between Maple Creek and Reflection Lakes, 
where the trail traverses across a washout with loose, unstable footing. I have yet to 
experience this myself, but am told it is particularly unpleasant in wet conditions.


<p class="heading">My Wonderland</p>

Trail notes and photos will be added here once I've completed hiking the Wonderland. Wish 
me luck for 2021!
