Eagle Peak
moderate
7.1 3030 5770
Longmire
none
2020

[NisquallySuspensionBridge.jpg] The Nisqually Suspension Bridge (at Longmire)
[Meadow.jpg] Final set of switchbacks up through meadow to the saddle
[Saddle.jpg] Eagle Peak Saddle
[StHelens.jpg] Looking south, Mount St. Helens (shown here), Adams, and sometimes even Hood are visible on a clear day
[Rainier.jpg] Looking north, the Nisqually Glacier and river valley, Paradise, and Muir Snowfield are splendidly clear

It's a quadfecta of volcanoes! One of the few spots in which you can spin in a circle and 
see all of Mounts Rainier, Adams, St. Helens, and Hood, without moving an inch.

Starting at Longmire, walk past the Park Service housing and cross the Nisqually River on 
a surprisingly sturdy and attractive wooden suspension bridge. If this seems 
overengineered for a mere trailhead access, it's because it used to lead to a car 
campground, which closed in 1989.

Turn left onto the trail, then climb through forest. And climb, then climb some more. 
Eventually the forest gives way to alpine meadow, and the gradient increases. A final set 
of very steep switchbacks leads to a rocky saddle in between Eagle Peak and Chutla Peak, 
where the maintained trail ends (although skilled climbers can continue to the top of 
either peak). It's worth exploring a short distance to the right, where you'll find a 
bench and a less obstructed view of Rainier, but be wary of the drop-offs both sides of 
this saddle.

The view of Rainier to the north is simply astounding. Close enough to make out every 
detail of the buildings at Paradise, the snowfield route heading up from there to Camp 
Muir, and crevasses on the upper Nisqually Glacier, but also just far enough away to be 
able to take in the mountain as a whole, unlike closer views where proximity can 
sometimes obscure a full understanding of what you are standing on part of.

Don't forget to turn around, though. To the south you will see Mount Adams, so close it 
feels you could reach out and touch it, Mount St. Helens, and also Mount Hood (which is 
rarely visible from Rainier). Only Baker is missing from this volcano party.
