Tolmie Peak
moderate
6.2 1890 5940
2019

[Lookout.jpg] Moon above the Tolmie Peak fire lookout, around 5:30 AM
[RiversOfCloud.jpg] River of cloud flowing over Ipsut Pass
[FantasyLandscape.jpg] Fantasy landscape in the dawn light
[GoodMorning.jpg] Good morning Rainier! (from Tolmie Peak)
[FromTolmiePeak.jpg] Rainier from Tolmie Peak, with Eunice Lake in the foreground

The trail to the old fire lookout at Tolmie Peak is popular. It is easy to 
see why: this is steep enough to be a good workout but not too long, located 
on the closest side of Rainier to Seattle, and offers an astonishingly 
well-composed view that could not have been better designed for the taking 
of selfies in front of.

Rainier novices who choose this hike because the drive seems shorter than to 
Paradise or Sunrise are in for an unpleasant surprise, though. The 17 mile 
Mowich Lake Road is mostly unpaved, potholed, and very dusty. Trailheads 
more distant from Seattle are usually actually faster and easier to reach.

Starting at Mowich Lake (which offers less in the way of views than it seems 
like it ought to) the trail runs north for a level, forested mile. Here the 
Wonderland Trail drops away to the right over Ipsut Pass, while you continue 
straight ahead. The route dips, then climbs back up, and forest gives way to 
meadows near Eunice Lake. Head around the left of the lake, switchback up 
onto the peak behind it, and you're at the fire lookout.

My solution to the problem of crowds was to start early. I hit the trail at 
4 AM, leaving myself plenty of time to reach the top before dawn. This was 
my first time hiking through woods at night, which turned out to be fun but 
spooky. My headlamp lit the tips of branches from only the closest trees, 
making the forest behind seem impenetrably black. It was a great relief when 
the one time I saw eyes glowing at me from the distance, they turned out to 
be just a deer!
