Fairfax Bridge Closure

9 miles from the <a href="CarbonRiver/">Carbon River</a> trailhead and 18 miles from
<a href="MowichLake/">Mowich Lake</a>, the Fairfax Bridge spans the steep-sided Carbon 
River valley, and provided the only road access to the northwest quarter of Mount Rainier 
National Park. Built in 1921, this historic steel arch has been steadily rusting away 
ever since. After years of concerning inspections, lack of funds for repair, and steadily 
increasing weight restrictions, WSDOT permanently closed the bridge in April 2025.

<table class="photos">
  <tr>
    <td>[photos/FairfaxBridge.jpg|The Fairfax Bridge, built in 1921, now rusted away to unsafety]</td>
  </tr>
</table>


# Facts

Without the bridge, there is no longer road access to popular places such as
<a href="MowichLake/">Mowich Lake</a>, [SprayPark], [TolmiePeak], and the
<a href="CarbonRiver/">Carbon River</a>.

This could change, but at least for now the Park Service has indicated that Mowich will 
be operated as a backcountry camp. Toilets will be open but not supplied with toilet 
paper. There'll be no trash pickup, and this is no longer a food cache location. The 
Carbon River ranger station will be minimally staffed, only as an emergency exit in case 
of injuries.

For Wonderlanders, this means the trail just got a lot harder. Rather than 3x sections 
each roughly 30 miles long, there's now one 30 mile section plus a 60 mile section. More 
food to carry. Fewer bailout options if your trip goes poorly.

The DOT is evaluating options, with the choices being do nothing, build a new bridge, or 
build a new road along some other route. Folk who know how such things work tell me the 
timeframe will be at least five years, i.e. best case 2030.


# Pleading

There's an emergency route into the area, used by first responders, the Park Service, and 
the few residents (pity them!) who live on the far side of the failed bridge. This is not 
open to the public because it crosses private land and is a rough single lane that cannot 
sustain volumes of traffic. Please be respectful of the rules here. The desires of 
hikers won't be aided if those deciding on a final solution come to view us as 
rulebreakers who have antagonized the local community.

Some have suggested could the Park Service drive food caches up to Mowich from somewhere 
else? Perhaps if they were betted funded, but not in the current climate with their 
current resources.

Others have suggested could you drop a cache in some unofficial location, perhaps North 
Puyallup accessed via the Westside Road? Although a long way to get there, this could 
work if you have a good enough friend to commit to an in-person supply handoff. Leaving 
food unattended in the wilderness is against regulations, and the Park Service has 
indicated they will remove any such noticed by rangers.


# But I Have To Get To Mowich!

From Sunrise, it's 23 miles on foot. From Longmire, 34. From the Westside Road, 28 
(partially bikeable).

From Carbonado, you could take the Melmont Ghost Town trail, which is 6.2 miles of 
usually very muddy dirtbike route to the Kolisch Bridge, then 5.3 miles of otherwise 
closed road to the Carbon River entrance. Going in this way would be 22 miles to Mowich, 
the first 11.5 of which is bikeable if you're ok with a rough, muddy, rooty route that 
crosses a few steep washout spots. This route passes beneath the failing Fairfax Bridge, 
so it's an open question whether someone might at some point get scared of that liability 
and decide to close it too.

<table class="photos">
  <tr>
    <td>[photos/FairfaxBike.jpg|Biking up the Melmont Ghost Town trail]</td>
    <td>[photos/FairfaxMud.jpg|Mud patch along the Melmont Ghost Town trail]</td>
  </tr>
</table>


# Big Feelings

In case you can't tell, I love this mountain to bits. It breaks my heart that some of my 
absolute favorite places are no longer easily reachable or shareable with friends.

I'm angry that this is a direct result of years of underinvestment in infrastructure, 
leading to a retrenchment of access that nobody wanted. Such a failing of accountable 
governance.

At the same time, I'm kinda glad that these special places will have some quiet time to 
recover from their overuse. As someone who enjoys logistical challenges and the thrill of 
figuring out how to access hard-to-reach places, I'm kinda excited to have more such to 
strive for. I value deep wilderness, and am not entirely sad that Tahoma now has more of 
that.

Bigger picture, it concerns me that there's a broad trend of wilderness access retreating 
at the same time as our urban population and the popularity of hiking are growing. The
<a href="SouthPuyallupPipeOrgan/">Westside Road</a>, [GlacierViewWilderness], 
[WestForkWhiteRiver], so many more, and now this. Meanwhile the vast majority of the 
Cascades are owned by logging companies and closed to the public. This concentrates 
hikers into just a few places where they cause undue damage, and seems like the wrong way 
to be managing our natural resources.

Change is constant in the mountains. When I moved to Seattle in 2005 I bought the book 
"Day Hike Mount Rainier". It describes the Carbon Glacier Viewpoint as moderate 
difficulty, 7 miles round-trip, and <i>"one of the easiest ways in Mount Rainier National 
Park to get up close and personal with a real, live glacier."</i>

Before I'd gotten around to visiting there, the floods of 2006 led to the Carbon River 
Road being converted to a trail and Ipsut Creek car camp to a backcountry campsite. Thus 
the entry for [CarbonGlacier] on this website describing it as 17.8 miles roundtrip.

Shortly after the Fairfax Bridge was closed, I visited the Carbon Glacier overlook by 
biking up the Melmont Ghost Town trail. It was 41 miles roundtrip.

This has me wondering, will the trend continue? I'm reminded of a conversation with a 
friend who worked on trail maintenance, where they described feeling that Tahoma was a 
sleeping dragon and all our efforts at building and easing access could be eradicated at 
any moment by her slightest snoring twitch.

<table class="photos">
  <tr>
    <td>[photos/FairfaxGlacier.jpg|The Carbon Glacier: a 7 mile hike in 2005, or 18 miles in 2010, or 41 miles in 2025]</td>
  </tr>
</table>
